Good morning.
Welcome to session 200,
Core Audio in Depth.
Please welcome your
digital audio plumber,
James McCartney.
Test?
OK.
OK, I'm going to talk about new features
for Tiger in the audio toolbox.
First, the audio converter.
First of all, I guess I'll introduce
what's going to happen.
I'm going to speak first,
then Doug Wyatt will speak about
some other new features for Tiger,
and then Bill Stewart will speak.
So the audio converter is a-- what is it?
It's an API for Core Audio that
allows you to convert different
audio formats from one to another.
It does floating point
integer conversion,
interleaving and deinterleaving channels,
sample rate conversion,
channel reordering,
and encoding and decoding
compressed formats.
And any codec that's installed
on the system can be used by the
audio converter to convert data.
The API looks like this.
These are the calls.
You create a new audio converter
using Audio Converter New.
And you set properties like
setting the bit rate for encoding.
And then you use Audio Converter
Fill Complex Buffer to--
to fill your buffers
with the converted data,
and you pass an input data proc for
getting the input data to the converter.
It's a full model.
And then if you want to stop a
stream and restart the converter,
you'd use Audio Converter Reset to flush
out all the buffers and start over again.
And then Audio Converter Dispose
will dispose the converter.
So new in Tiger is a new call
called Audio Converter New Specific,
and that allows you to choose a
specific manufacturer's codec.
By default,
when you create a new audio converter,
you get the default codec
for a certain format.
So this allows you to specifically
choose a certain manufacturer's codec.
You can see the difference between
Audio Converter New Specific
and Audio Converter New is that
there's an array of audio class
descriptions that are passed in.
And you pass in a list of
audio class descriptions,
and it will choose the earliest
matching codec in the list.
So you would put the codec
manufacturers in the order that
you preferred that they matched.
The audio class description
looks like this.
There's three fields that
are four character codes.
The first is the type,
which is either ADEC or
AINC for decoder and encoder.
And then the second one, Subtype,
should match the format
ID code for the format.
So like AAC space for AAC or .mp3 for
mp3 or whatever the format type is,
IMA4.
And then the last four-chart
code is the manufacturer code.
So for Apple's AAC decoder,
it would look as shown here.
The type is ADEC for decoder.
Subtype is AAC space for AAC and
then APPL for Apple manufacturer.
Okay, another new feature for
the Audio Converter is the
Audio Converter property settings.
This is a CFArray that you get back from
the audio converter that contains the
parameter settings for the converter.
And you can use that for building
a user interface for the audio
converter or configuring another audio
converter similarly to the current
one without having to run through and
do all the parameter settings again.
The property settings.
So the format of the CF object is
the CFArray of CFDictionary's for
each converter that's in
the audio converter chain.
An audio converter,
when it converts audio,
may have several components inside of it,
like a float-to-integer conversion
or sample rate converters or
interleavers and deinterleavers
or encoders or decoders.
And so each subconverter that has
property settings in the chain will have
a CFDictionary that contains all the
property settings for that converter.
So each converter dictionary is a
CFDictionary and it has several keys.
The first is converter,
which is a non-localized,
the first key is converter and
then the value for that key is the
non-localized name of the converter.
This is like a key that
you would use for matching.
Like if you want to find this sample rate
converter in the audio converter chain,
you would go through and look
for sample rate converter and
that will always be the same.
And then name, the key name,
the value for that is the
localized name of the converter.
So that would change depending
on the local language.
And then parameters is a
key that is a dictionary.
It was an array of dictionaries
for each parameter.
So each parameter of the audio converter
will have a dictionary that describes it.
And so the parameter
dictionaries look like this.
There's a key,
the key key is the non-localized
name of the parameter,
which you use for matching again.
And then name is the localized name of
the parameter for displaying to the user.
And then available values is all the
possible values for that parameter.
So if it's sample rates,
it would be a list of the
sample rates that are supported.
Or if it's bit rates,
it would be the list of the
bit rates that are supported.
That would be all the bit
rates supported for a codec.
And then limited values would be
the ones that would be enabled at
the current time for the current
settings of the converter or codec.
So if you have the codec set up for,
like in AAC's case,
for a large number of channels,
then you can't choose lower bit rates.
So those values would not appear
in the limited values list.
And then current value
contains the current value.
It's an index into the
list of available values.
And then hint is a Boolean which tells
you if it's a normal or expert parameter.
And then summary is a little
help string for the parameter.
So if someone moused over
it on the user interface,
interface, you could show that to the
user to describe the parameter.
Okay,
so this is what a dictionary looks like.
This would be for an audio converter that
just has a sample rate converter in it.
So there's,
at the top level it's a CFArray,
there's one entry in it,
it's a CFDictionary that contains the
parameters for the sample rate converter,
or contains the keys for
the sample rate converter.
So the first key is converter,
which is sample rate converter,
that's what you could use for matching.
You can find it.
The name is sample rate converter,
that will change depending
on the local language.
And then you have a parameter array.
So there's two parameters for
the sample rate converter.
The first parameter is called quality,
and this next parameter
is called priming method.
So then you have the localized
name for those parameters.
And available values for
quality would be minimum,
low, medium, high, maximum.
And then for priming
method it would be pre,
normal, or none.
And then you have limited values,
which is basically the same in this case,
that doesn't change.
And current value would be the index
into the available values array.
And summary,
the help string you showed to the user.
And then the hint field tells you
whether it's normal or expert.
Thank you for listening.
The priming method is
an expert parameter.
So, okay, that's the audio converter.
That's just the new features basically
in a short review of what it is.
So Audio File is Core Audio's
interface to audio files parsing.
And the newest feature for
Tiger is Audio File Component.
So if you have an audio
file format and you say,
gee, I wish Core Audio could
read this file format,
well,
you can write your own format parsing
component and install it in the system.
And then everybody who uses the
Audio File API will be able to read the
format that you wrote your component for.
So there are component plugins
for the Audio File API.
And we're going to provide SDK code so
that you can write your own component.
And there will be a sample
component implemented there.
And now if your file container
contains a compressed format,
then you'll want to write an audio
codec so that people will be able
to decode and encode to that data
format and then put it in your file
format or some other file format.
Okay.
So this is the audio file component API.
It's basically a mirror
of the audio file API.
The audio file API will
just call down to these.
And the most important thing about
the audio file component API is
that you don't call this API.
It's called from the
audio toolbox framework.
Your audio file component
implements the component selectors
that this API calls into.
So this API is basically glue code.
You can access it through the
audio toolbox if you wanted to
test your component directly.
For normal use, it's meant to be called
from the audio file API,
calling your component for the client.
And the SDK has classes that--
that implement those calls.
So you would only have to subclass one
of the classes we provide in the SDK to
create your audio file parsing component.
So, as an aside,
the Audio Codec API is another similar,
it's a plug-in API for
the audio converter.
And you don't call the
Audio Codec API either.
It's meant to be called from the
toolbox by the audio converter.
So if you write an audio codec,
or if you want to convert data,
you shouldn't use the
audio codec directly.
You should use the audio converter.
The audio converter instantiates
the codecs when someone requests
to do a certain conversion.
And there's a sample codec implementation
in developer examples as well.
That brings us to what's the
philosophical split between a
container for data and the data itself.
Audio File API is meant to deal
with the container for the data.
When you open an audio file and you say,
I want PCM samples out of this,
the audio file provides you access
to the raw data as it is in the file.
So if you want to convert that
from whatever format it's in
to what you're interested in,
maybe PCM, then you would need to use the
audio converter to do that.
So if,
now for extending the audio file API,
you have audio file components to
support new file types and then to extend
what new data formats you can handle,
you have the audio codec
API for writing components for
converting compressed formats.
And then to find out what capabilities
are available in the system,
for audio file,
you use audio file get global info
that will allow you to find out what
file types are supported on the system.
And then for audio converter,
you use the audio format API,
which will tell you what audio
formats that have codecs installed
on the systems and you can get
information about those formats.
So, okay, well,
I just blew through those.
Okay.
So here's an example of using the
audio format API to find out what
encoders are installed in the system.
Basically,
you have a get property info to find
out what's the size of the list you need
to allocate to get the format IDs back.
And then you call audio
format get property,
and that will give you a list of all
the four-character codes that would
go in the subtype field of the audio
class description or the format ID field
of an audio stream basic description.
And so you have an array
there of the format IDs,
and then I have a loop here that goes
through and asks the audio format API to
get the format name as a CFString,
and then I print it out there.
So that's how you do it.
That's how you could print out a
list of all the encoder-- available
formats for encoding on the system.
And similarly, here's a code example for
printing out all the file types
that are writable on the system.
It's the same setup.
Basically, you call audio file,
get global info to find out how
big of a list you need to allocate,
and audio file,
get global info to-- audio file,
get global info size for
the size of the list,
and audio file,
get global info for getting
the list of file types.
Those are also four-character codes.
And then you can get the name,
the CFString name for each file type,
and that's printed out in
the loop there as well.
So, okay,
another new feature in Tiger is to be
able to get and set chunks in chunky
file formats like AIFF and WAV files.
So, and the data that you get back
or set should be in the raw
native format of the file.
There's no parsing done on what
the contents of the chunk are.
So, there's an audio file property,
chunk IDs,
which allow you to get the list
of four-character codes for the
chunks that are in the file.
And then audio file count user
data will be if you have a certain
chunk ID that you're interested in
and you want to find out how many
of that chunk are in the file.
You can call this and get
the number of that chunk,
a number of occurrences
of that chunk in the file.
And then get user data size will tell
you the size of a specific chunk.
You pass up the file and the chunk ID and
the index of the chunk ID in the file.
So, if there's like four and
you want the second one,
you can pass one for the index.
It's zero-based.
So, and then that will tell
you the size of that chunk.
So, then you could allocate a
buffer and you use audio file
get user data to get the data.
So, you can get the data for
that chunk out of the file.
And so, if you're writing an audio file
component to support your own file
format and it was a chunky file format,
then there's these call down
into selectors in the audio
file component API as well.
So, you could pass back your own
chunks from your file format.
So, all right.
So, then get user data actually
gets the data out of the file.
There's a flags feel.
There's a flags feel for this for it's
basically reserved for future use.
So, then you pass up the size and
the buffer for the user data.
And then audio file set user data is
you pass up the data and the size and
the data and it sets that on the file.
All right.
[Transcript missing]
And so the file marker is a
structure and it contains the name,
position,
and other information about the marker.
Okay.
And with that, it's time for Doug Wyatt.
Thanks, James.
So I'd like to introduce a few more new
features in the audio toolbox for Tiger.
We have new features for
high-level access to audio files.
This builds on top of
the audio file APIs.
We have some new audio units to
support scheduled playback of
audio files and scheduled playback
of arbitrary audio buffers.
And we have a new UI component,
which is in Cocoa,
which you can use in your applications
to present the user with lists of
audio formats and file formats,
as James was just describing.
And we also have an audio unit that
supports rendering on a separate thread.
So first, the Extended Audio File API.
It provides an even higher
level of access to an audio file
compared to the Audio File API.
As James was mentioning,
we have good reasons for separating
the audio file and converter
APIs at the lower levels,
but it becomes really useful at
a higher level to just be able
to sequentially access an audio
file in an arbitrary PCM format.
Those of you who have our SDK,
you've seen the
CA Audio File C++ class in there,
and this basically replaces it.
So diagrammatically,
how this fits into the picture,
extended audio file contains an
audio converter and an audio file.
It uses the audio file API to
communicate with the file on
disk in its native file format.
But through the embedded audio converter,
it then presents your application
with the ability to just do I/O in
the PCM format that you prefer.
This is a very simple API by
comparison to the lower level ones.
Pretty much all you have to
do is open or create a file,
configure the converter
if you're doing encoding,
and then you can sequentially read
from the file or write to it if
you're encoding or just writing PCM.
You can seek around within the
file down to sample accuracy
even within an encoded file.
And you can also tell,
which is the logical thing
to have if you can seek.
And so this API is described
in this header file here.
So the second new Tiger feature
I'd like to mention is the
audio format selection view,
which is a Cocoa UI.
It's a subclass of NSViews,
so you can do things like
just embed it in a save panel.
and others.
So, what is the Mac OS X?
Well, it's a very simple, easy-to-use,
and very easy-to-use, as the accessory.
It's subclassable,
meaning that it's got hooks
so you can decide things like,
well, I know I always want to write
this particular file format,
so don't show that menu.
And it will, as it says there,
let you select an audio file type,
data format that's
appropriate to that file type,
any encoding parameters, sample rate,
and the channel layout
if it's more than stereo.
I'll just give you a quick peek at that.
In the demo, please.
And so here I've got it embedded as
the safe panel on an application.
And right now I've got AIFF selected,
so my available audio data
formats are just integer formats.
But if I select AIFC,
then suddenly I've got access
to the encoded formats which
can be embedded in an AIFC file.
And if I were to select
an encoded format,
I'd have a button here where
I could configure the encoder,
but that's not hooked up yet.
So this isn't in your seed,
but it will be in future Tiger seeds.
Back to the slides, please.
Okay, so the way it works,
you just give the view object the
source data format that you're
encoding from and its channel layout
if it's got more than two channels.
And what you get back are an audio
file type ID like AIFF or WAV.
You get back the output data format
like float or 24-bitint or 16-bitint,
bigger little endian,
whatever you're encoding
to or just writing to.
And you get audio converter properties
back again if you're encoding.
Okay, I just did that.
Okay, so next.
We have several new audio units in Tiger,
and there's a couple of them which
are of a new class called generators,
meaning that they don't
take audio or MIDI in.
You either interact with
them programmatically by
setting properties on them,
or by bringing up their user interface
and letting the user do something that
tells them to make noise of some sort,
for example, a test tone generator.
This one, the AU Audio File Player,
falls into the programmatic
category for the most part.
It's designed to be a nice building
block for playing back little slices
of audio files or large slices
with sample-accurate precision.
It's built on top of the
Extended Audio File API,
which gives it the ability
to play back encoded formats.
So it's particularly appropriate
for situations where you want to
stream a long file off of disk.
It's sample accurate,
so you could use it as a building
block in even a digital audio
workstation kind of application.
And it's also usable in simpler
situations where you just want to
play a long file asynchronously.
The one thing it's not good
for is playing short sounds.
If all your application is going to do is
play a few short sounds here and there,
it's not worth the overhead because
this audio unit will create a separate
thread for reading the audio off of disk.
And if you've got a 200K audio file
that's an alert sound or something,
you don't need that thread overhead.
You might as well just load the
file into memory and play it.
You can use NSSound to do that,
and you can also use
the system sound APIs,
which are really the best way to be
playing alert sounds on the system now.
So conceptually, the way that the
AU Audio File Player works,
there's this hardware timeline.
If you've ever looked at the
timestamps going by on an audio unit,
you'll see that they're
typically these giant numbers,
and it's the number of samples
since the hardware was started.
So there's that timeline
that's going along.
And then to play audio files,
in this example, I've got two events,
two chunks of audio files that I want to
play at some point along this timeline.
And instead of having to know
where on the timeline I am,
I just construct my sequence of
events to be relative to time zero,
which is when I'm going to start
playing this sequence of events.
So the one on the left,
I'm playing at time zero.
It's file A.AIF,
and I'm playing the first
100,000 samples out of it.
And I've got another chunk out
of audio file B that I want
to play a little bit later.
So that's how the events look that
I schedule when I want to have
them played relative to time zero.
And after that,
I just need to set a start time.
And I can do this in one of two ways.
If I'm in a situation where I need
to synchronize very accurately,
and I know exactly where on that
audio device's timeline I want
to start playing those events,
I can specify the start
time in sample numbers.
The other alternative,
in a simpler situation,
is I can just say start now by
passing a start time of minus one.
So just to give you a little
more detail about how this
API or this audio unit is used,
you open the audio files in your
application externally to the audio unit.
Your application owns those
references to the audio file,
not the unit.
So your application keeps it open.
You pass an array of audio
file IDs to the unit.
So when it comes time
for it to read off disk,
it will have the files open.
You schedule the events that
you initially want to have play.
Then you prime the unit,
which is just a set property call on it.
And what that does is goes and
fills up the disk buffers enough
so that when you do say start,
it will have the data
off the disk already.
Then you set the start time.
And as the events play,
you get callbacks saying
this one's been done,
this one's been done.
And in response to those callbacks,
or other events in your application,
you can always schedule additional
events onto the file player unit.
And at any time,
you can just call AudioUnitReset
and it will stop playing.
And there's about eight paragraphs
of documentation on the tiger seed in
AudioUnitProperties.h describing how
to use this unit programmatically,
and that is in your seed.
Just to zoom in one more level,
here's the structure that you use for
scheduling regions to the audio file.
It's got an audio timestamp.
You can actually schedule using
sample numbers or host times,
which can be useful sometimes.
And the audio timestamp structure,
as you may know, contains both a sample
number and a host time.
You have an optional callback
completion proc that gets called
when the region has been either
successfully loaded from disk.
Well, actually,
it's always called when it's
successfully loaded from disk,
but that's also used to tell
you if it didn't get it off
the disk and played in time.
The structure also contains a
reference to an audio file object.
You just say where in the file in
terms of sample frames and number
frames that you want to play.
This can even be in an encoded format.
For example, it's an MP3 file.
You say I want sample 512.
Well, that's a bit of the ways
into the first packet.
It will actually seek into the middle
of the packet and begin playback there.
And I've got a little demo application
which illustrates the AU Audio file.
So what this does is lets me generate
a random playlist out of a bunch
of audio files on my hard disk.
I can say how long I want the playlist
to be and what the minimum slice size is.
The longest one is.
Click that.
And this is a little slow because
it's actually parsing through
all of the frames of the MP3s.
And so it's generated a playlist here.
Oh, they're all the same length.
That's no fun.
Oh, it's OK.
So it's my little music concrete player.
So that's dynamically reading
and decoding the MP3s on the I/O,
or rather on the disk read thread,
and preparing them to be played back.
So it wasn't cheating and
generating the playlist ahead
of time into an audio buffer.
It was actually playing
those back as we went.
Okay, so one related audio unit, in fact,
this one is a subclass,
or actually the base class, I'm sorry,
of AU Audio File Player,
is the AU Scheduled Sound Player.
And it shares a lot
of the same semantics,
like how to set the start
time on it in particular.
The difference is instead of
scheduling chunks of audio files to it,
you give it audio buffers
and memory to play.
And one internal client for
this is the speech synthesizer.
And if your application dynamically
generates audio into buffers,
you may find this a useful way to pump
it out into a chain of audio units.
And this unit's also documented in
AudioUnitProperties.h and is in the seed.
The last of the three new audio
units I'd like to talk about
is the AU Deferred Renderer.
So this one is a converter audio unit.
And the idea here is to have it pull its
input on a separate thread from the one
on which it's being pulled for output.
And this lets you put a
processor-intensive task on a
separate thread instead of on
the real-time audio thread.
So you can process your audio in larger
chunks at a slightly lower priority.
There's opportunities for taking
advantage of multiprocessing.
The API is documented in
detail in AudioUnitProperties.h
And I'll just give you an illustration
of when you might want to use it.
So here's an example.
It could be anything that
I'm using as my source here,
but it's an AU Audio file player,
and I've got a CPU-intensive audio
unit going to an audio output unit.
And I'm running the
hardware at 128 frames,
which is around 3 milliseconds
at 44.1 kilohertz.
And the fullness of those green
IO cycle rectangles is how much of
each render cycle is being occupied
by this CPU-intensive audio unit.
And so we're kind of
running on the edge here.
We're probably consuming around 85%
of the CPU just rendering that audio.
So what you can do if latency
isn't so important and you want to
actually get some more CPU power
back is use the deferred renderer.
So now on the upper line
here we have the source,
the CPU intensive audio unit.
Those are running on a separate
thread owned by the deferred renderer,
which is on the lower line here,
and it's still being driven
by the audio output unit.
So what this does is it periodically just
wakes up the lower priority thread to do
work and pulls that at the larger grain,
which you can specify.
So in this example,
We still have our 128 frame I/O cycles,
but we're only doing our
rendering in 512 frame cycles.
And depending on the algorithm,
of course, your mileage may vary,
but in many algorithms you can
get a good performance gain by
processing more samples at a time.
So just to review,
I mentioned the extended audio file API,
which combines an audio file
with an audio converter.
And all of these are in the seed,
by the way, of Panther.
There's the audio format,
except the audio format selection view,
excuse me.
That will be in the new
Core Audio Kit framework.
We have three new
programmable audio units,
the AU Audio File Player,
the AU Scheduled Sound Player,
and the AU Deferred Renderer.
And with that,
I'll bring up Bill Stewart,
who's going to talk about
Mac OS X and OpenAL.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so OpenAL and Mac OS X.
We had some conversations about this
last year in the games developer session,
and I wanted to give you
an update of where we are.
So OpenAL is,
just to give you some background
if people don't know what it is,
it's an engine that's designed for games.
It's designed to be a
complement to OpenGL,
so it follows similar API conventions,
coordinate systems, and so forth.
It's been originally
developed at Creative Labs.
There's now a specific
website devoted to it.
It supports multiple platforms
and has for a number of years,
I think it's been available
for about four years now.
So on the PCs, there's implementations
for the original Mac OS,
Mac OS X, Windows and Linux,
and you'll also see some support
that was recently announced at
the Games Developer Conference for
game consoles,
PlayStations.
GameCube and Xbox.
So it's a pretty broad API and it was
one of the things that attracted us to
support this because of its broad reach.
To give you some example of the games
that are supporting it in brackets,
there's a list of the
platforms that are doing it.
So there's quite a good
collection of games.
The OpenAL website actually
has a full list of all of
the different games and apps.
And companies that are supporting it.
So if you're interested to
see the sort of coverage,
that's a good website to look at.
And in the
Games Developer Conference of 2004,
we announced that we were going
to support this in the API,
provide an implementation for it.
The implementation that we did was based
on pre-existing Core Audio services,
and I'll give you a bit of an
overview of how we've done this.
We also made the source available
for the implementation of the
Core Audio API for it on the website.
OpenAL has both hardware and
software implementations.
You've got implementations that
are implemented in sound cards like
Creative Sound Blaster and so forth,
and there's also implementations
that run on CPUs.
Ours, of course, is running on the CPU.
And one of the things we're announcing
in this conference is that we're going to
be pre-installing the framework in Tiger.
It's actually on your
TigerSeed disks at the moment.
OpenAL framework,
that's essentially what's
available on the OpenAL website.
As we continue to develop and enhance
the OpenAL to Core Audio bridge,
we'll be putting the source back
into the OpenAL organization.
So it's also a good reference
if you want to see how to use
Core Audio in different ways as well,
and we fully support the open source.
So that's good news, I think.
One of the things that's fairly unique
about OpenAL on Mac OS X is that it uses
system sound services and automatically
will configure to the system that
the user has currently installed.
So if you have a surround system
and the user has gone and set up
the surround in Audio/Midi setup,
it will be automatically
configured and will just play
through the surround system.
If you've just got stereo,
then the OpenAL logic that's
in the implementation will
find that it's a stereo device,
and then the mixes that it
will do will be for stereo.
And you can have a look at
how to configure systems,
which you would need to do if you're
doing any kind of multi-channel
surround playback in applications,
utilities.
There's some abilities there to go in,
say, where your speakers
are and what channels,
and so forth.
And having done that,
then you're just ready to go,
and that's a system-wide service.
So other applications that are
doing surround will just work
in the same way that this does.
This is a diagram of the
implementation that we do for it.
It uses two audio units.
It uses the output unit.
Output unit AUHAL is an audio unit
that interfaces to the device.
We recommend very strongly
that unless you're doing very,
very particular things with devices
that you use the output unit
rather than the audio device API.
It provides a lot of management of just
device state that's very handy for you.
The output unit is just going to get
data and output it from the device,
and it's getting data from
the 3D mixer audio unit.
This audio unit can take
any number of inputs.
It has different parameters that you can
set on the inputs like a pitch parameter,
distant parameters that can
be particular for each input.
You can have mono or stereo inputs.
And the 3D mixer will just take these.
It will take panning
coordinates for each input,
place them in a sound field.
You can describe with the 3D mixer
different panning algorithms.
One is called vector panning.
Vector panning will just look
at the location of a sound.
Let's say it's there,
and it will look to the
closest two speakers,
and it will just place the
sound in those two speakers.
The one we use in OpenAO,
and I think it's the more pleasing
algorithm for this sort of usage,
is a sound field approach.
What that will do is in each speaker
it creates a representation of
the sound field at that location.
So if you have a sound over there,
that sound will be in
all of the speakers,
but it will be very quiet.
In this one, as you get closer to the
location of the sound,
it's louder.
And so they're the kind of
things that the 3D Mixer does,
and this is also the sort of things
that they do on the creative cards
and on other hardware implementations.
Then the inputs to the
3D Mixer are OAL sources,
and a source object is something in
the OpenAL API that you can manipulate,
that you can set properties on,
and so forth.
And one of the main things the
OpenAL source has is a list
of buffers that you can play.
And you can be sharing buffers
between different sources.
The buffer can have different
format characteristics,
mono, stereo,
etc., different sample rates.
And the game engine just basically
queues the buffers up to be played.
Now in the line between the two buffers,
we're using the audio converter
API that James went through.
And that'll take the
buffers that are on this,
it'll convert them.
We've spent a couple of years on this,
and it's a really good idea.
We've spent some time doing
optimizations to the blitters
that we've most of that in path.
To the end, some of the right
conversions are all there.
And then we also provide a utility
call in the OpenAL library that
uses the audio file API to read...
[Transcript missing]
So we spent a lot of time over the last
couple of months just looking at our
components of this rendering process,
seeing whether...
The problems we were seeing where
we could optimize the performance,
making sure that the
that we were looking at,
you know, distance practice.
One of the things that
distance will do is
frequencies so ... you'll hear less
high frequencies coming through,
and there's also a volume attenuation.
In OpenAL you can specify a
very nice sort of volume curve,
and we've supported a similar thing
in the 3D mixer for quite some time,
where you can say, "well,
in this distance the sound did not get
louder or quieter." So you can imagine,
like,
you're going up to a B or something,
and if we take a foot of
that B it will be the same.
The sound should get quieter and
then you can't hear the sound at all.
You can specify those conditions
when you're doing a game so that
your sounds have characteristics
of how they're going to be mixed,
how they're going to be played.
and you can imagine if you've got an
engine sitting in the corner over here,
then in this room we're never
going to get far enough.
We're going to talk about some of
the things we went through when we
were looking at doing this because
this enhances the game experience.
As we went through all of
this optimization work,
we managed to gain about a 50%
improvement in the 3D mixer audio
unit as a part of this work.
We also profiled a couple of games.
Blizzard uses the applications directly,
so we had a look at some of
their uses of our system.
We overall, I would say,
about a 50% improvement in rendering
from what we had in Panther.
And then to give you some idea of the
difference between the implementation
we provide now and the implementation
that we have previously for Mac OS X,
on a PowerBook 1 GHz G4,
we take about a 5% CPU load
to mix 64 sources into stereo.
So that's 5%. So that's not
doing sort of some fancy stuff.
You'll see a bit more of a load if
you're doing other kinds of things.
But if you think of a 1Gb PowerBook G4,
that's not a high-end
machine in today's standards.
We're not saying 5% on a 2.5 Joule G5.
This is a fairly representative system.
And the kinds of improvements we saw,
the next best implementation
that was previously available,
was about 20% for that same test.
So overall,
with the improvements to the 3D
mixer plus more optimal blitters in
the audio converter and so forth,
we're down at about 25% of
what was previously available.
So that should be really good news for
you when you're looking at your game.
And I think you've heard
enough of all of us talking,
so we're going to kill some aliens.
Thank you.
Unreal Tournament,
and maybe if walks around and we've got
sound coming from all the speakers here.
Have we got the front speakers on?
Useless.
Left and right.
Are you guys hearing sound from all?
It's hard to tell from up here.
As Bob's sort of moving around,
you can see probably the people
kind of around here are getting
the best listening experience.
I'm not.
You can see how the
sound is moving around.
It should be coming to the front of you.
I don't know why that is.
Find the quiet sound.
You can hear just sort of how the
sounds are kind of phasing in and out.
You can hear some of the distance work.
And that's the things we
were talking about earlier.
[Transcript missing]
We have an excellent survival video
on this on a pretty regular basis.
We have a very good team of developers,
and we have a very good
team of developers.
We have a very good team of developers,
and we have a very good
team of developers.